# LAB08:  Hidden Markov Models - Basic Algorithms



## Tutorials


1. Computing with HMMs with discrete densities
- [HMM with Discrete Densities](https://compi1234.github.io/spchlab/Tutorials/hmm_examples_discrete.html) 
 
   
2. HMMs with Gaussian Mixtures (continuous densities)

- [HMMs with GMMs (part1)](https://compi1234.github.io/spchlab/Tutorials/hmm_examples_gauss1.html) 
- [HMMs with GMMs (part2)](https://compi1234.github.io/spchlab/Tutorials/hmm_examples_gauss2.html) 
   

## Exercise I - Computing with HMMs: basics

*notebook:* [hmm_exercise_I.ipynb](hmm_exercise_I.ipynb)

The purpose of this exercise is do basic computations in a Trellis, 
i.e. compute an additional column in a trellis given a new observation and doing backtracking to find the Viterbi alignment.

The notebooks contain all code necessary to do the computations.
However, we strongly adivse you to do THESE BY HAND.  This will help you in understanding the functioning of the algorithms.


## Exercise II - Computing with HMMs: Understanding the sequence modeling and feature transformations

*notebook:* [hmm_exercise_II.ipynb](hmm_exercise_II.ipynb)

HMMs are great tools for sequence modeling. 
The concept is that your data is generated by a sequence of states with different properties.
By doing a Viterbi alignment we can track through which states the data moved and we get a state level transcription
that can be understood.

However, there are some important limitations to the HMM concept as well.  
A state models a stationary process defined by the observation model.  
Within a state data is assumed to be IID (Independent Identically Distributed).
This implies that the order of the data WITHIN a state is irrelevant.
Thus the likelihood of data sequence x1-x2-x3 being observed in S1 is identical to sequence x3-x2-x1 being observed.  

Exercise II will draw your attention to this stationarity assumption in a number of different ways:
- how very different "looking" data can have identical scores on an HMM
- how very different "looking" training data can lead to identical models

Finally we will show how sequence information can simply be incorporated in the data 
by the use of delta features.

This exercise CAN be done by hand but involves quite a few computations.
You can also track it in the notebook and do a few computations.  
However, try to answer each of the questions as you progress and without looking ahead !!


## Exercise III - Recognizing speech with HMMs

... coming ...